Mitochondrial DNA depletion results in remodeling the epigenome and transcriptome through changes in the levels of acetyl-CoA

Oswaldo A. Lozoya1, Inmaculada Martinez-Reyes2, Tianyuan Wang3, Dagoberto Grenet1, Taylor Wolfgang1, Pierre Bushel4, Jianying Li3, Navdeep Chandel2, Gonzalo Riadi5, Douglas Ganini da Silva6, Richard P. Woychik1* and Janine H. Santos1* 

    Janine Hertzog Santos, Ph.D.
     janine.santos@nih.gov
    
    Richard P. Woychik, Ph.D. 
    rick.woychik@nih.gov



Abstract
    Mitochondrial metabolism has been implicated in epigenetics but the extent to which this impacts gene expression is unclear. Here we show that loss of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) results in locus-specific alterations in histone acetylation, DNA methylation and expression of a subset of genes. Most of these changes are rescued by restoring mitochondrial electron transport in a way that maintains the oxidative tricarboxylic acid cycle, but not reactive oxygen species or ATP production, or by modulating the mitochondrial pool of acetyl-CoA. Changes in acetyl-CoA and histone acetylation precede overt mitochondrial dysfunction and significant changes in gene expression and DNA methylation. This suggests that acetyl-CoA levels signal mitochondrial status to the nucleus. Differentially expressed genes with altered histone marks or DNA methylation regulate amino acid degradation, which likely compensates for the changes in acetyl-CoA and one carbon metabolism. These have the potential to further affect methylation reactions, redox control and nucleotide levels. These results illustrate the extent to which mitochondria impact cell physiology through epigenetic remodeling.  
    

Summary: mitochondrial regulation of epigenetic remodeling


Keywords: mitochondria, mtDNA, electron transport, acetyl-CoA, epigenome, gene expression regulation
    
Introduction
    Mitochondria are classically recognized for energy and reactive oxygen species (ROS) production through the process of oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS). However, diverse biochemical processes take place in mitochondria in addition to OXPHOS, including amino acid metabolism, iron sulfur cluster biosynthesis, calcium homeostasis and folate transformations (1). Key to normal mitochondrial function is the interplay between the electron transport chain (ETC) and the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle. The TCA cycle is fueled by nutrients derived primarily from dietary sugars or fat, and generate reducing equivalents (NADH and FADH2) that are used by the ETC to produce ATP. Additionally, NADH and ATP are allosteric regulators of some TCA enzymes so the output from the ETC and OXPHOS can directly regulate the cycle. Many TCA intermediates such as acetyl-CoA, succinate and ?-ketoglutarate also function outside of mitochondria, and levels of mitochondrial NADH or NADPH contribute to the regulation of the cellular redox state (2).
    Many complex human conditions such as aging, diabetes, metabolic syndrome and Alzheimer’s disease have etiologies that are associated with mitochondrial dysfunction (3). Other diseases are caused by mutations in genes encoded by the nuclear or mitochondrial genomes (4). For instance, mutations in the mitochondrial autophagy genes pink and parkin in the nucleus are involved in the genetic forms of Parkinson’s disease, and several mutations along the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) lead to Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy. Most recently, mutations in TCA metabolic enzymes, e.g. IDH and fumarate hydratase, were shown to play a causative role in cancer through the generation of oncometabolites (5, 6). It is also notable that changes in mitochondrial function can alter the nuclear transcriptome (7). However, the mechanisms by which changes in mitochondrial function impact nuclear gene expression remain poorly understood.
    There is increasing interest in studying the role of mitochondria in modulating the epigenetic control of gene expression in the nucleus. Several mitochondrial TCA intermediates are substrates or co-factors for enzymes that regulate the nuclear epigenome. For example, acetyl-CoA is used by the histone acetyltransferases (HATs) to acetylate histones (8). Also, ?-ketoglutarate is a co-factor of enzymes involved in histone or DNA de-methylation reactions; these enzymes can also bind fumarate or succinate, which in turn inhibit their function (8). We recently showed that impaired mitochondrial function through the progressive and acute loss of mtDNA led to decreases in various TCA metabolites and changes in bulk histone acetylation. We also showed that partial reinstatement of ETC function without replenishing mtDNA restored citrate levels and corrected the defects in global histone acetylation (9). These data strongly suggest that the levels of mitochondrial acetyl-CoA, and potentially other mitochondrial metabolites, may be rate-limiting and directly associated with the epigenetic reactions controlling nuclear gene expression. However, it is not known whether mitochondrial-dependent epigenetic changes alter the transcriptome. Here we utilized the same genetic systems and a cell line chronically depleted of mtDNA to demonstrate that perturbations in mitochondrial function result in genome-wide histone acetylation changes that are followed by remodeling of DNA methylation patterns, which together modulate the expression of a distinct set of genes. 
Results
Loss of Mitochondrial Function Remodels the Transcriptome
    To understand how changes in mitochondrial function can influence the transcriptome through epigenetic remodeling, we started by utilizing the HEK293 cells expressing the DN-POLG system that we described previously (9).  In brief, activation of expression of the DN-POLG leads to progressive and ultimately complete loss of mtDNA over the course of 9 days (9). The result is cells that have no electron transport and OXPHOS function and must be grown under glycolytic conditions. Transcriptome analysis was conducted using RNA from HEK293 cells expressing DN-POLG by RNA-seq (Table S1) and microarrays (Table S2) at days 0, 3, 6 and 9. The microarray data was curated based on probe sets of annotated transcripts unambiguously mapped to individual genes in the hg19 reference genome to enhance gene cross-referencing between RNA-seq and microarrays experiments (10) (Fig. S1A-C). As expected, mtDNA was progressively depleted over the 9-day timeframe, which was paralleled by loss of mtRNA transcripts (Fig. 1A). We then compiled a list of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) by performing pathway enrichment analysis (IPA) using data obtained from metabolomics (Table S3) and RNA-seq or microarray experiments, separate and combined (Fig. S1D; for details see Materials and Methods). From here, we generated a final list of ‘focus genes’ that exhibited differential expression in DN-POLG cells along the 9-day timeframe of mtDNA depletion (Table S4). The differential expression of 12 randomly selected genes was confirmed using quantitative real-time PCR (Fig. S1E). A schematic representation of the workflow encompassing all genomic analyses performed in this study is presented in Fig. S1F.
    We detected 94 DEGs at day 3, 851 at day 6 and 889 at day 9 for a total of 1,282 DEGs relative to day 0 using either RNA-seq or microarray technologies (Fig. 1B left panel). Only 43 genes consistently changed across all time points (Fig. 1B right panel), indicating the dynamic nature of gene expression associated with the progressive depletion of mtDNA over this 9-day period.  The majority (68%) of DEGs at day 3 were upregulated while at days 6 and 9 most (~60%) DEGs were downregulated (Fig. 1B and C). On average, gene expression changes were relatively small (?2-fold, Fig. 1C).  Thus, we performed unsupervised hierarchical clustering using average cross-platform relative expression of the subset of genes shared within all 1,282 detected DEGs annotated in both RNA-seq and microarray datasets (1,031 focus DEGs, N=6) to identify shared trends of gene expression that likely underlie coordinated regulation of pathways. We found 9 distinct clusters with distinguishable patterns of expression (Fig. 1D; for identities and clusters of DEGs see Table S4). Genes with patterns that fell into clusters 4-6 exhibited, on average, small changes while those on clusters 1, 2 and 9 showed up to 4-fold changes.
    To determine the pathways that were affected by genes following similar expression patterns, we performed IPA with the genes in each cluster. This revealed significant enrichment of different metabolic networks (see Fig. 1E for snapshot and Fig. S2 for all pathways).  We found that genes in cluster 1 were enriched for amino acid metabolism and urea cycle reactions. There was significant enrichment, particularly in cluster 3 genes, of pathways for one-carbon metabolism and folate transformations (Fig. 1E and S2,) as well as cytosolic metabolism of sulfated molybdenum cofactors; expression of cluster 3 genes increased by day 6 but then plateaued at day 9 (Fig. 1E and S2). Metabolic networks from other clusters included OXPHOS and metabolism of ketogenic intermediates (clusters 4 and 6), choline and transulfuration pathways (clusters 4 and 5), biosynthesis of cholesterol, glycerolphospholipids and NAD/NADP interconversions (clusters 6-7), salvage pathways of pyrimidines (clusters 5-7), and sulfate management through glycosaminoglycan and proteoglycan metabolism (clusters 7-9). Genes in cluster 2 did not significantly enrich for any particular pathway (Fig. 1E and S2A). Notably, these cluster-level enrichment analyses successfully detected two metabolic pathways associated with mitochondrial dysfunction: impaired pyrimidine metabolism (11), and remodeling of one-carbon metabolism, which has been recently linked to mtDNA depletion in vitro and in vivo (12, 13).
    To define if these changes in gene expression were specific to this cell line or more generally associated with mtDNA depletion, we also analyzed the transcriptome of the widely used 143B cells chronically depleted of mtDNA by exposure to low doses of ethidium bromide (EtBr) (11, 14). We found about 3,300 DEGs (Table S5) between the rho+ and rho0 counterparts. This set of genes enriched for similar pathways as was observed with the HEK293-based system described above (Fig. S2B). The high concordance between overall pathways was unexpected given the differences in cellular background and the chronic versus acute state of mtDNA loss between the two cell systems; this indicates that there is a conserved gene expression program triggered when mtDNA is depleted.  Taken together, the picture that emerges is that metabolism of folate, nucleotides and several amino acids, which contribute to acetyl-CoA and methionine pools, are significantly modulated by mtDNA depletion.
TCA Cycle Restoration Rescues the Majority of DEGs
    We previously showed that we could selectively rescue the TCA cycle in the HEK293 DN-POLG cells by expressing two non-mammalian proteins, S. cerevisiae NDI1 and C. intestinalis AOX, that facilitate partial electron flux (15). We showed that the expression of NDI1/AOX produced a “pseudo-ETC” that selectively increased TCA cycle output by restoring NADH oxidation without re-establishing ATP production by OXPHOS or the mitochondrial membrane potential (9). The utilization of this AOX/NDI1 approach allowed us to dissect the contributions of electron transport and TCA cycle to the biological defects resulting from mtDNA depletion.  Most notably, the expression of AOX/NDI1 revealed that restoring ETC and the TCA cycle can rescue the histone modifications but not the cell proliferation defect associated with mtDNA depletion. We went on to demonstrate that the impaired cell proliferation could be rescued by selectively restoring mitochondrial membrane potential and HIF1 stabilization (9). Thus, the utilization of the HEK293 cells ectopically expressing the AOX/NDI1 genes represents a unique model to connect TCA cycle-driven epigenetic changes with gene expression regulation.
    When we compared the transcriptional profiles of AOX/NDI1-expressing cells at day 9, when mtDNA is fully depleted, and at day 0, when the cells still have their full complement of mtDNA, we found that only 23 genes were differentially expressed (p?0.05; Table S6).  This contrasts with what we found with just the DN-POLG cells at these two time points (Table S4).  As a control, we examined how the ectopic expression of the AOX/NDI1 impacted the transcriptome by comparing gene expression changes under mtDNA repletion conditions in isogenic DN-POLG cells with or without the expression of the AOX/NDI1 genes at day 0.  Overall, there were no significantly different expression changes in cells expressing AOX/NDI1 compared to just DN-POLG cells at Day 0 when adjusting for false discovery rate (FDR). Using unadjusted p-values, we found 915 probe sets corresponding to 842 genes that were changed with min and max fold-changes of ?9.5 and +6.9 (95% confidence interval: ?1.9 to + 2.15) (Table S6).  IPA analysis of these 842 genes had little overlap with the pathways identified in the context of mtDNA depletion (Fig. S2C).
    To gain insights into the pathways rescued by AOX/NDI1 expression in the context of complete mtDNA depletion, we compared the average fold change of genes within each cluster in DN-POLG versus AOX/NDI1 cells (at day 9 relative to day 0). Our assumption was that the average change in expression among genes within a cluster reflects the regulation of the pathway. We found that genes in the DN-POLG cells that followed patterns within cluster 1, 3, 5 and 6, on average, reverted to levels close to or below those of day 3, while the remaining genes changed to levels like day 6 (Fig. 1F and 5E upper panel). Given that at day 9 both DN-POLG and the AOX/NDI1-expressing counterparts exhibited complete loss of mtDNA, this result suggested that the metabolic rescue provided by AOX/NDI1 was sufficient to normalize functions like one carbon metabolism and TCA (from cluster 3 and 6, Fig. 1E) but only partially rescued other pathways such as degradation of spermine/spermidine and putrescine (from cluster 4, Figs. 1E, F and 5E upper panel). These data suggest that maintenance of a functioning oxidative TCA can influence, at least partially, several metabolic pathways in the cells.
Changes in Histone Acetylation are Associated with Alterations in the Transcriptome
    It was recently shown that the transcription factor ATF4 is associated with a gene expression program resulting from mtDNA depletion that remodels one carbon metabolism (12). The rescue of expression of most DEGs in our system by the ectopic expression of AOX/NDI1, including the ones associated with one carbon metabolism, suggests that there are other key regulators, in addition to ATF4, that are required to trigger the transcriptional changes associated with mtDNA depletion. Considering that we had previously demonstrated that bulk histone acetylation was rescued by AOX/NDI1 expression (9), we hypothesized that epigenetic changes caused by mitochondrial dysfunction could play a role in modulating gene expression associated with mtDNA loss. This hypothesis predicts that the histone changes associated with the promoters of DEGs in the cells with mtDNA depletion would be maintained by the expression of AOX/NDI1 expression, even in the absence of mtDNA. To test this, we performed chromatin immunoprecipitations followed by deep sequencing (ChIP-seq) at days 0, 3, 6 and 9, first in DN-POLG cells and then in the AOX/NDI1-expressing counterparts. We specifically tested histone H3K9ac because it is primarily associated with gene promoters and was one of the histone marks that we previously found to be decreased (~50%) upon depletion of mtDNA (9).
    Western blots reveal bulk changes in the level of specific histone modifications, but they do not inform bulk decreases in H3K9ac reflected loss of peaks at the gene level or decreased peak height genome-wide, we first established the total number of H3K9ac peaks in the samples versus input DNA at days 0, 3, 6 or 9 (peak calling by MACS2 method, FDR p<0.01 v. input DNA, IDR<0.01). A total of 25,872 peaks were identified, of which 16,171 were present at day 0 in the DN-POLG decreasing to only 4,888 at day 6 (Fig. S3A). We next defined the peaks around ±10Kb of the TSS of the nearest gene. After merging H3K9ac peaks with overlapping coordinates, we were left with 20,290 peaks that were present at promoter/enhancer regions and gene bodies.  Decreasing the window to ±2Kb of TSSs yielded a total of 19,446 peaks. Irrespective of the window utilized, the enrichment of H3K9ac decreased as a function of time in the DN-POLG cells as shown by the average H3K9ac signal intensity around TSSs (Fig. 2A, left panel and Fig. S3B). This locus-specific analysis showed that loss of H3K9ac was significant at day 3 and at some loci robust (up to 80%, data not shown), which was not identifiable by Western blots (9) reflecting the lack of sensitivity of this technique due to the global nature of the analysis.
    To define whether the loss of H3K9ac mark was associated with the expression of the 1,282 DEGs, we first focused only on peaks that exhibited highly significant changes. Using EdgeR and adjusted p<0.05 for pair-wise comparisons between days 3, 6 or 9 vs day 0, we identified 592 peaks. Unsupervised clustering of these revealed 8 distinct clusters that reflected different behaviors over time (some differed on the degree of change, see Fig. S3C). Next, these 592 peaks were used as seed to identify other significant peaks that exhibit similar changes over the 9 days of mtDNA depletion (for details see Materials and Methods). This approach detected 16,264 peaks that overall coalesced into 2 distinct patterns of behavior (Fig. 2B). Cluster A included 651 H3K9ac peaks that went up on days 3 and 6 and then returned to baseline at day 9; cluster B involved 15,610 peaks that progressively decreased over time (Fig. 2B). The finding that some peaks increased despite the decrease in bulk H3K9ac further highlights the need to study changes in histone marks at the locus level.
    Having determined which and how H3K9ac peaks changed, we next asked which promoters these coincided with, specifically whether the promoters of the 1,282 DEGs were within those coordinates. We found 10,921 genes that overlapped with the changing H3K9ac peaks (±2Kb of TSSs), and that 1,094 were DEGs (Fig. 2C). The number of genes that showed differential expression and modulation of H3K9ac was significantly different than the number of genes that showed changes in the H3K9ac mark but no differential expression (p=7.9X10?121, odds ratio=5.66; Fig S3D). This result suggests that changes in H3K9ac are prevalent in DEGs during mtDNA depletion. Of the 1,094 DEGs, 32 harbored H3K9ac peaks assigned uniquely to cluster A while the remaining (1,062) followed peaks that progressively decreased (cluster B). For identities of the genes in each cluster see Table S7. Further inspection of the 32 DEGs belonging to cluster A revealed that all had 2 distinct peaks that were close to each other. We noticed that while the promoter peak went down over time, the second peak located nearby in the gene body, but not in an (annotated) exon, increased (see example on Fig. 2D). The concordance of gene expression modulation and H3K9ac peak changes is presented in Fig. 2E. Most DEGs that lost H3K9ac over time (cluster B) were also inhibited at any time point (Fig. 2E).  In the 32 DEGs from cluster A, increased H3K9ac coincided with increase in expression, respectively, of 19 and 11 genes at days 3 and 6, while the return of H3K9ac back to basal at day 9 matched the inhibition of 12 genes (Fig. 2E).
    We then used the DEGs in cluster A (32) and B (1,062) to perform IPA. Pathways associated with cluster A involved fatty acid activation and mitochondrial L-carnitine shuttle, which reflects early activation of ?-oxidation as an alternative source of acetyl-CoA (Fig. 3A). Genes that fell into cluster B were enriched for pyridoxal and pyrimidine salvage pathways, one carbon metabolism, cholesterol biosynthesis and ?-oxidation (see simplified version on Fig. 3A and full pathways in Fig. S3E). When evaluating H3K9ac peaks in the DN-POLG cells expressing the AOX/NDI1 genes, it was evident that the number of peaks was maintained despite mtDNA depletion (Fig. S2A); similar behavior was observed when analyzing peaks specifically at promoter regions (Fig. 2A, right panel). Most importantly, AOX/NDI1 expression in the context of mtDNA depletion maintained the H3K9ac peaks at the exact same coordinates where the marks were lost in the DN-POLG samples (examples in Fig. 3B). Because cells depleted of mtDNA cannot generate mitochondrial ATP by OXPHOS or ROS through the ETC, we conclude that it is the metabolic rescue provided by the maintenance of NADH oxidation and the oxidative TCA cycle in the AOX/NDI1 cells that impacts histone acetylation.
Mitochondrial acetyl-CoA levels modulate HAT activity and histone acetylation in the nucleus
    Histone acetylation levels are maintained by a balance between the activity of histone acetyltransferases (HATs), that use acetyl-CoA as substrate, and histone deacetylases (HDACs) that remove the acetyl group from their targets. Some HDACs, like the sirtuins, are NAD+-dependent and could be sensitive to mitochondrial dysfunction. Given that the bulk of acetyl-CoA in cells is generated from mitochondrial-derived citrate, mitochondrial dysfunction associated with mtDNA depletion could affect histone acetylation by modulating HAT or HDAC activities. To test this premise, we utilized the 143B rho0/ rho+ system. We chose this system to avoid confounding effects associated with loss of cell proliferation observed in the DN-POLG at day 9 (9). Biochemical analysis confirmed that the rho0 cells lacked mtDNA and had impaired respiration when compared to the rho+ control; they also showed decreased production of ROS, but no differences were observed in ATP levels or in the NAD+/NADH ratio (Fig. S3A-E). Western blots confirmed that under chronic mtDNA depletion in the 143B background the levels of acetylated histones were decreased in the nucleus (Fig. 4A).
    Next, we examined total cellular HDAC and HAT enzymatic activities using fluorescent-based assays. While no differences in aggregate HDAC activity were identified between the 143B rho+ and rho0 cells (Fig. 4B), HAT function was decreased to ~50% in rho0 cells (Fig. 4C). The diminished HAT activity was not caused by decreases in the mRNA levels of various acetyltransferases (Table S5) or in the protein levels of GCN5 and EP300, which acetylate H3K9 and H3K27, respectively, (Fig. S4A). We also ruled out the possibility that HAT genes were severely mutated as a result of treatment with EtBr (Fig. S4B). Most importantly, we could replicate the decreased HAT activity in 143B cells freshly depleted of mtDNA with EtBr (Fig. S4C), which showed impaired respiratory capacity (Fig. S4D), and in mouse embryonic fibroblasts from the mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) heterozygote mouse (Fig. S4E). The TFAM heterozygotes carry ~50% of mtDNA (Fig. S4F) and were shown to have mild but chronic mitochondrial dysfunction (16). Combining these data with our previous findings (9), the picture that emerges is that total or partial depletion of mtDNA, whether acute or chronic, impacts HAT activity in different cellular backgrounds.
    The consistent decrease in HAT activity observed in cells depleted of mtDNA led us to hypothesize that impaired mitochondrial function results in decreased acetyl-CoA levels, and that this decrease in acetyl-CoA influences HAT activity and histone acetylation in the nucleus. To test this, we started by comparing the levels of cellular acetyl-CoA in rho+ and rho0 cells and found that there was a 50% reduction in the rho0 cells (Fig 4D). Additionally, we exposed 143B rho+ and rho0 to the pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase (PDK) inhibitor dichloroacetate (DCA), which should increase levels of mitochondrial acetyl-CoA (17), and found that DCA treatment fully restored HAT activity in rho0 cells while it had no effect in rho+ controls (Fig. 4E). Similarly, when rho0 cells were exposed to the cell permeable dimethyl ?-ketoglutarate (?-keto), which can increase acetyl-CoA (Fig. 4F) by entering oxidative TCA (17), HAT activity was significantly enhanced (Fig. 4G), and there was increased histone acetylation (Fig. 4H). Conversely, decreasing the mitochondrial-derived pool of acetyl-CoA in rho+ cells, through inhibition of the citrate carrier using BTC (1,2,3-benzenetricarboxylate; Fig. 4I) or the mitochondrial carnitine transporter (CPT1), lead to a decrease in HAT activity (Fig. 4J). Because mitochondrial-derived citrate is converted into acetyl-CoA in the cytosol by ATP citrate lyase (ACL), which was shown to modulate levels of nuclear histone acetylation (18), we inhibited ACL in the cells using hydroxycitrate as previously described (17). We found that exposure of rho+ cells to HC led to decreased HAT activity (Fig. 4K) and histone acetylation (Fig. 4L; full Western blot on Fig. S5G), but it had no further effect in rho0 cells. This result suggested that the pool of citrate available for ACL-dependent generation of acetyl-CoA is already limiting in rho0 cells.  Taken together, these results indicate that changing levels of mitochondrial acetyl-CoA can influence HAT activity and histone acetylation.  Furthermore, these findings suggest that the concentration of cellular acetyl-CoA, which is impacted by the pool generated in the mitochondria, is a key regulator of epigenetic reactions within in the nucleus. 
Mitochondrial Dysfunction Impacts DNA Methylation Patterns in the Nuclear Genome
    Epigenetic control of gene expression also relies on DNA methylation, which can be influenced by reactions associated with one carbon metabolism and the methionine cycle. Given the effects of mtDNA depletion on one carbon intermediates (Table S3) and genes (Table S4), we next examined whole genome DNA methylation patterns in the DN-POLG cells at days 0, 3, 6 and 9 using the Illumina 450K bead array. Although overall small (range of ?%mCG: ?20% to +10%), we found significant changes in the degree of DNA methylation upon mtDNA depletion at the promoter regions of various genes. In general, DNA methylation increased over time. The heatmap presented on Fig. 5A depicts the difference in percentage of methylated CpG at days 3, 6, and 9 versus day 0 for 25,403 differentially methylated loci (DML) around gene promoters in DN-POLG cells.  These DML were annotated within 10 Kb from the TSS of 12,461 genes, which we refer to as differentially methylated genes (DMGs) (for CpG coordinates and placement with respect to gene identities, see Table S8). DML with increased methylation were detected at day 3 becoming most prominent at day 6. In contrast, methylation differences at day 9 were closer to day 3 levels (Fig. 5A), perhaps indicating adaptation. Increased DNA methylation was also observed in the 143B rho0 cells (S5A). We also found increased DNMT (DNA methyltransferase) activity in 143B rho0 cells (Fig. S5B). Unfortunately, we were not able to generate reliable results on evaluating TET activity using commercially available assays (data not shown).  Thus, we conclude that depletion of mtDNA alters DNA methylation patterns in the nucleus at least in part by increasing DNMT activity.
 ays 6 or 9 (but not 3) are associated with differential DNA methylation status. The average degree of DNA methylation changes in the AOX/NDI1 rescue experiment was minor and not statistically different when comparing methylation of genes genome-wide versus the 1,282 DEGs (Fig. 5C), indicating that, on average, DNA methylation status was maintained in these cells. At the gene level, there were significant changes in DNA methylation at the promoters of 177 genes in the AOX/NDI1 cells, which were part of the DEG list (Table S8 and 9). Out of these, 119 were also differentially methylated in the DN-POLG cells, but the levels of methylation in cells expressing the AOX/NDI1 genes were closer to those changes observed at day 3 (Fig. 5D). Figure 5D also depicts the concordance in directionality of the changes in the DMEGs found in the DN-POLG as well as of those 119 identified in the AOX/NDI1-expressors. Collectively, these findings reveal that mitochondrial dysfunction results in changes in DNA methylation patterns, some of which are rescued (~20%) by restoring partial ETC function.
    To better understand the extent to which DNA methylation may contribute to the differential expression of genes and the pathways they impact, we displayed methylation differences at the locus level next to the 9 clusters presented in Fig. 1C.  When displaying the data this way, it became evident that the number of DMEGs identified in the DN-POLG cells increased over time in all clusters. Also, the degree of methylation change was exacerbated over time, with the largest changes in the negative direction for genes within clusters 6 and 7 (Fig. 5D).  DEGs within cluster 2 had fewer DMEGs when compared to the others, suggesting that DNA methylation changes may have little impact on the expression of genes within this cluster. Further support to this conclusion comes from the fact that methylation of promoters is usually associated with inhibition of gene expression (19) and the genes within this cluster were, on average, the most upregulated (Fig. 5D). For the rest of the clusters, the proportion of genes that were hyper- or hypomethylated was somewhat even, irrespective of the directionality of transcription of the genes (Fig. 5D). These results suggest that expression of some genes within these clusters may be influenced largely by their DNA methylation while others may harbor additional epigenetic modifications that help define the directionality of their change.
    When comparing the trends of methylation within each cluster in the DN-POLG to the corresponding 119 focus gene promoters that also changed methylation in the AOX/NDI1 rescue cells, several things become evident. First, AOX/NDI1 expression primarily resulted in increased methylation of loci (Fig. 5E). Second, just a few genes within clusters 1, 2 and 9 had methylation changes in the AOX/NDI1 cells (Fig. 5E, compare green dots with grey and black ones), making it less likely that mitochondrial-driven DNA methylation plays a role in the modulation of pathways associated with those genes (such as asparagine biosynthesis or thiosulfate disproportionation, see Fig. 1D). Third, maintenance of ETC in the AOX/NDI1 expressing cells seems to have the biggest effect in terms of numbers for DEGs within clusters 3, 4 and 7 (Fig. 5E). Cluster 3 is highly enriched for one carbon metabolism, which can impact methylation reactions (20), while cluster 4 enriches for alternative pathways to generate acetyl-CoA. Thus, even though AOX/NDI1 expression only impacts ~20% of the ~50% of DMEGs detected in the DN-POLG, the ones affected have the potential to further impact methylation reactions. This may explain a secondary effect on DNA methylation that is initiated by mitochondrial dysfunction but that is not rescued by reestablishment of NADH oxidation through expression of the AOX/NDI1 genes.
The Vast Majority of Transcriptome Changes in Response to MtDNA Depletion Are Associated with Epigenetic Remodeling and Initiate Through H3K9ac Modulation
    To gather insights into the epigenetic landscape of DEGs, we defined the number and identity of genes that were associated with changes in both or either mark alone. Comparison of the data revealed that 582 DEGs had both a change in their H3K9ac mark and DNA methylation, which is about 45% of all DEGs, 512 DEGs (~40% of the total) had only H3K9ac changes, 55 DEGs (~4% of DEGs) showed only differential DNA methylation and the rest (129 or about 10%) of them had none of the epigenetic marks studied (Fig. 6A and Table S9 for gene identities). From the genes bearing both H3K9ac and DNA methylation changes, at day 6 the concordance in predicted transcription directionality was identified for 48 genes and at day 9 it was for 99 DEGs (Fig. 6B). For the genes that showed both decreased H3K9ac and DNA methylation, which are opposing signals, 26 genes were up-regulated and 36 were down-regulated at day 6, while 26 were up- and 51 down-regulated at day 9 (Fig. 6B). Next, we performed IPA with the genes based on their epigenetic status. We found that while phospholipases and triglycerol metabolism were the two pathways shared among all the DEGs, irrespective of their epigenetic status, many pathways were exclusive to genes bearing both or one of the marks (see Fig. 6C for a summarized version and Fig. S7 for full pathways). For instance, DEGs having both H3K9ac and DNA methylation changes enriched for salvage pathways of pyrimidines, amino acid degradation, and one carbon metabolism (Fig. 6C and S7). Conversely, DEGs with only changes in H3K9ac were involved in heme biosynthesis (Fig. 6C and S7). We found that DNA methylation-only bearing DEGs were enriched for NAD biosynthesis and L-serine degradation, which can also affect one carbon metabolism. The genes that had no changes in the two studied marks enriched primarily for acyl-carrier protein metabolism and D-mannose degradation (Fig. 6C and S7).
Mitochondrial Dysfunction-Driven Epigenetic Remodeling Poises the Genome for Transcription
    We found that approximately 10,000 expressed genes across the genome show statistically significant changes in either their H3K9ac or DNA methylation status but are not themselves differentially expressed.  To understand how mitochondrial-driven epigenetic changes ultimately influence the differential expression of a subset of genes, we compared the degree of H3K9ac change over time in areas close to the DEGs and to genomic locations where genes were transcribed but not differentially expressed (versus day 0). What we found was that the average change in this histone mark between day 0 and the other time points was significantly different only at day 6, and higher in non-differentially expressed genes when compared to the DEGs (Fig. 7A); however, statistical significance was enhanced by the large sample size of non-DEGs (Fig. 7A). Similarly, we did not find statistical correlation between the average degree of change in DNA methylation with altered gene expression at any time point, although the spread of the data was higher in non-DEG promoters (Fig. 7B). Therefore, we conclude that while these epigenetic marks influence transcription, the degree of change alone does not dictate whether a gene is or not differentially expressed.
    We also looked for upstream regulators of gene expression since it was previously proposed that loss of mtDNA in the DN-POLG cells invokes transcriptome changes associated with the transcription factor ATF4 (12).  It is possible that ATF4 and other transcriptional regulators work in concert with epigenetic changes, including the H3K9ac and DNA methylation marks identified here, to drive gene expression. When using IPA and stratifying the data into genes with or without epigenetic marks as a function of time (Fig.7C), we found that ATF4 was the top 1 most significant predicted upstream regulator in the DN-POLG cells, active already at day 3 (i.e. positive z-score >2). Also, FOXO1 was predicted to be significant but rather inhibited at day 3 (Fig. 7C). This analysis also revealed the potential role of other transcription factors, including some known to be associated with mitochondrial function such as PPARG (peroxisome proliferator activator receptor gamma), which nonetheless showed a significant z-score only at day 6 (Fig. 7C). Interestingly, from the other transcription factors identified (Fig. 7C), at least three (ATF2, DDIT3 and FOXO1) have been shown to work in concert with ATF4 (21, 22). In this analysis, we also found other transcriptional regulators that could potentially be sensitive to mitochondrial dysfunction. For instance, the acetyltransferase EP300 that acetylates several proteins, including histones, and is itself activated by acetylation (23). The fact that the transcriptional program regulated by EP300 is predicted to be repressed is consistent with the decreased levels of acetyl-CoA observed in our cell system. We found that the ATF4 signature was present in all categories that involved H3K9ac changes, was less significant when considering genes with only DNA methylation and was not predicted in genes without these epigenetic marks (Fig. 7C). Likewise, the role of EP300 as an upstream regulator was only identified in the gene categories that bear changes in their H3K9ac. Also, it became obvious that the data obtained based on genes with both marks or only H3K9ac changes mirrors that of the analysis of the transcriptional regulators themselves (Fig. 7C compare middle and right panels), indicating a large overlap between genes that bear epigenetic changes and their potential transcriptional regulators. Most importantly, considering that the H3K9ac changes were significant at day 3 and most transcription factor involvement was predicted only at day 6, these data suggest some temporality where the H3K9ac changes precede the transcriptional response.
Discussion
    The experiments described in this report were designed to better understand whether mitochondrial function regulates the transcriptome through epigenetic remodeling. Capitalizing on our previous results with the HEK293 DN-POLG system, where we showed that mtDNA depletion resulted in decreased histone acetylation that was reversed genetically by ectopic expression of AOX/NDI1 (9), here we report that mitochondrial dysfunction results in substantial reconfiguration of the epigenome and transcriptome. Specifically we show that: (i) acute (HEK293 system) or chronic (143B system) mtDNA depletion leads to extensive changes in the degree of H3K9ac and DNA methylation genome-wide, (ii) in parallel, mitochondrial-derived citrate and acetyl-CoA levels decrease, and methionine metabolism is remodeled, (iii) HAT activity is largely influenced by the pool of acetyl-CoA generated in mitochondria, and that increased DNMT activity explains at least some of the increased levels of DNA methylation; (iv)  in both conditions of acute or chronic mtDNA depletion  a specific set of genes that respond to such stimulus is differentially expressed and (v) the epigenetic and most of the changes in gene expression  are reversed by maintaining NADH oxidation (AOX/NI1 cells) or directly boosting TCA cycle in mitochondria (pharmacological interventions in 143B cells).
    Our ChIP-seq analyses revealed that reduction of bulk H3K9ac results in 16,264 H3K9ac-bearing loci across the genome that change peaks over the 9-day period of mtDNA depletion. These H3K9ac-altered peaks were associated with 10,921 genes, including 1,094 of the 1,282 (86%) DEGs identified in our system. Moreover, methylation analysis revealed 25,403 differentially methylated loci (DML) around 12,461 gene promoters, which included 637 (~50%) of the genes that we determined were differentially expressed during mtDNA depletion. Given these data and the noteworthy relationship between DEGs that concomitantly show changes in their H3K9ac or methylation marks and the fact that all these changes are abolished by maintaining mitochondrial NADH oxidation despite mtDNA loss (Figures 2 and 4), we propose that the epigenetic modifications resulting from mitochondrial dysfunction are responsible for at least some of the changes to the transcriptome identified herein.
    It is also noteworthy that changes in the two studied epigenetic marks were not only associated with DEGs. About 90% of the ~10,000 genes with changing promoter H3K9ac peaks did not show differences in their steady state RNA levels. Likewise, DNA methylation changes were observed in over 10,000 genes in the DN-POLG cells, yet changes in this mark were associated with only 637 DEGs. These results were not surprising and likely reflect the fact that there are many epigenomic variables and transcription regulators that can influence whether a gene is expressed or not, and the extent to which they may be differentially expressed (24). As we only examined two marks, it is fairly likely that other chromatin configurations were present in the areas of the genome where genes were not differentially expressed. Alternatively, some of the extensive epigenetic remodeling we measured may poise the genome for changes in gene expression once the system is exposed to subsequent perturbations, evoking adaptive or even maladaptive responses. Future experiments involving a more extensive analysis of epigenomic and chromatin regulators will help with this issue.
    The transcriptional program we found resulting from mtDNA depletion highlights the significant metabolic remodeling that takes place upon ETC dysfunction. Early on (at day 3), differential expression is modest with only 94 genes being affected. However, despite no evident mitochondrial dysfunction at this point (9), there was an increase in transulforination, which can feed the methionine cycle and be used for signaling, and in degradation of amino acids such as leucine. Fatty acid activation and mitochondrial ?-oxidation were also increased at this time, which together with leucine can increase TCA-derived acetyl-CoA production. As time progressed, several additional means to increase acetyl-CoA were engaged concomitantly to inhibition of genes associated with the TCA cycle and OXPHOS. For instance, degradation of amino acids including valine and tryptophan that feed into the TCA cycle through succinate was also observed. By day 6 and 9, several genes involved in one carbon metabolism through serine, glycine, methionine and folate were engaged. The degradation of choline, spermine and putrescine, all of which can feed into the methionine cycle, was also affected. By day 6 pyrimidine synthesis was inhibited as was the biosynthesis of cholesterol, which is important for membrane production. Together with the remodeling of one carbon metabolism that also affects purines, it becomes clear that cells depleted in mtDNA were decreasing DNA replication and cell proliferation, both energy demanding processes, at the metabolic level, consistent with our previous results (9).
    IPA revealed that many of the pathways regulated by altered H3K9ac levels impinged on acetyl-CoA and one carbon metabolism. As H3K9ac changes were significant at day 3 while methylation patterns were only significantly changed at day 6 and 9, we suggest that the histone changes precede and potentially control the modulation of DNA methylation. Thus, the picture that emerges is that mtDNA depletion leads to changes in NADH oxidation and oxidative TCA cycle, which in turn affect levels of acetyl-CoA. This is conveyed to the nucleus early on by altering the histone acetylation landscape. While at this time cells are attempting to alternatively increase the acetyl-CoA pools through different sources, this remodeling of chromatin allows ATF4 early access to its targets. ATF4 sets in motion an amino acid response that largely remodels one carbon metabolism, which in turn impacts DNA methylation. Genes affected by methylation further influence amino acid degradation perhaps in a continued attempt to make acetyl-CoA. It is worth noting that lipids metabolized primarily through peroxisomal lipid oxidation were recently shown to be an alternative source of acetyl-CoA for histone acetylation (25). Under our experimental conditions, while fatty acid activation and mitochondrial ?-oxidation were increased, peroxisomal ?-oxidation was inhibited. Thus, in the face of mitochondrial dysfunction, histone acetylation is not compensated by peroxisomal lipid metabolism.
    Interestingly, histone acetylation itself was not reversed despite the compensatory attempts to increase the acetyl-CoA pool, indicating that the changes in the epigenome are potentially required to sustain this transcriptional program. This is consistent with the concept that whereas transcription factors are essential for driving initial gene expression responses, epigenetic factors are indispensable for shaping and maintaining transcriptional programs (24). Alternatively, maintenance of acetylation of histones as compared to other non-histone proteins may have less preference in the overall cellular context, which may explain why in the context of chronic mtDNA depletion (in the 143B rho0) nuclear histone acetylation is lower. Acetylation is the second most abundant posttranslational modification of proteins with 90% of metabolic enzymes being regulated by it (26). Thus, it is possible that maintenance of a certain level of acetylation of non-histone proteins is required to sustain key physiological processes. Considering that it is estimated that 20% of the mitochondrial proteome is acetylated (27), perhaps maintenance of mitochondrial function itself relies heavily on a steady state level of protein acetylation. Irrespective, the loss of histone acetylation upon mtDNA depletion can be easily explained by decreased citrate and acetyl-CoA associated with slower flux through the TCA cycle, which are fully rescued both by AOX/NDI1 expression, as shown in both Table S3 and elsewhere (9), as well as by pharmacological manipulation of the mitochondrial pool of acetyl-CoA (Fig. 4). While the mitochondrial pool of acetyl-CoA is not likely to reach the nucleus, it can influence the output of ACL, whose inhibition was shown to decrease nuclear histone acetylation (18). Indeed, treatment of 143B cells with HC only affected HAT activity and histone acetylation in control cells, having no effects on the rho0 cells (Fig. 4). These results strongly suggest that ACL can only regulate the epigenome in the context of a functioning mitochondria.
    The alterations in DNA methylation, however, are more complex to explain. While our data in both the DN-POLG and 143B rho0 is consistent with previous work that showed hypermethylation of nuclear DNA in rho0 cells generated in a different cellular background (28), it is also at odds with recent data. MtDNA depletion in the HEK293 cellular background was proposed to limit the amounts of methionine available for methylation reactions by increasing homocysteine transulforination at the expense of its remethylation (12). Our results while consistent with the increased in transulforination (Table S3), are not in line with the predicted decrease in methionine. Methionine levels can be maintained through several pathways, including putrescine and spemidine/spermine degradation, which are increased in our cells (Table S3). The metabolism of S-adenosyl-methionine (SAM) is believed to be regulatory for maintaining methionine levels.  Flux through the remethylation pathway is inhibited by accumulation of S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH), the byproduct of SAM transmethylation (20). In the DN-POLG cells the levels of SAH were consistently lower than SAM, which is also known to favor DNA hypermethylation (29, 30), although the ratio goes down at day 9 (and in the AOX/NDI1 cells; Table S3); this likely explains the lesser degree of differential DNA methylation by day 9 in DN-POLG. Additionally, levels of methionine are significantly increased upon mtDNA depletion when comparing day 9 to day 0 (Table S3). Thus, we propose that flux through the remethylation pathway is likely not affected by mitochondrial dysfunction although carbon tracing experiments would be required to directly test this hypothesis. In support of this interpretation, expression of AOX/NDI1 rescued the transulforination intermediates but did not affect levels of methionine or significantly changed the SAM/SAH ratio (Table S3). Perhaps signaling through transulforination, as shown for the TET enzymes (31), could impact DNA methylation in these models.
    Our observations suggest that changes in promoter H3K9 acetylation or DNA methylation driven by mitochondrial dysfunction result in a chromatin state poised for regulated gene expression, which converge with targeted transcriptional changes at open chromatin regions. In that manner, upon specific stimuli (in this case, loss of mtDNA) the activation of transcription factors together with remodeling of epigenetic/chromatin environment lead to the differential expression of a subset of genes. This is in line with our results that predict the involvement of ATF4 and of other transcription factors known to be associated with mitochondrial dysfunction, as well as the engagement of transcriptional regulators likely sensitive to acetyl-CoA. We hypothesize that it is the combinatorial role of these different players that orchestrate this mitochondrial-driven adaptive response. This may also explain the observation that ablating ATF4 by itself had no deleterious effects in the HEK293 background (12). It is also noteworthy that the H3K9ac changes we observed were significant at day 3 and that most transcription factor involvement was predicted only at day 6, suggesting some temporality where the H3K9ac changes precede the transcriptional response. Finally, the lack of ETC-generated ROS in our system does not support the idea that ATF4 is activated based on mitochondrial redox signaling as previously proposed (13).
    Collectively our data highlight that mitochondrial function is critical for maintenance of the epigenetic landscape. While we had previously shown that restoration of the mitochondrial membrane potential does not recover histone acetylation, it is yet unknown if it impacts other epigenetic reactions. Future studies to define whether other alterations of mitochondrial function, including the presence of mutations that can affect mitochondrial ROS or calcium levels, mitochondrial dynamics or other endpoints in metabolism can also affect the epigenetic landscape will be important.  Most importantly, studies to determine whether these findings can be recapitulated in vivo will be required.  Our results raise important questions about the extent to which mitochondrial disorders, as well as diseases associated with mitochondrial dysfunction, have an epigenetic component. Studies on whether the tissue heterogeneity that is classical of mitochondrial diseases associate with epigenetic reprogramming are now warranted. Lastly, our experiments raise the possibility that environmental toxicants that target the organelle exert their effects, at least partially, through modulation of the epigenome. Clearly, this work brings new opportunities and challenges in trying to understand and treat health conditions associated with mitochondrial dysfunction.
    

Materials and Methods
Cells. HEK293T cells carrying a Tet-on inducible dominant-negative DNA polymerase gamma transgene alone (DN-POLG) or the derivative also ectopically expressing alternative oxidase (AOX) and NADH dehydrogenase 1-like enzyme (NDI1) were generated and cultured as described previously (9).  Except for ChIP-seq experiments (N=2) all experiments were performed on an N=3 independent biological replicates. The osteosarcoma cell line 143B and the initial rho0 derivative were graciously obtained from Dr. Eric Schon at Columbia University. TFAM MEFs were a kind gift from Dr. Gerald Shadel (Yale School of Medicine). All cells were routinely grown in DMEM high glucose supplemented with 10 mM pyruvate, 50 ?g/mL of uridine, 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin under 37ºC and 5% CO2. TFAM MEFs media did not contain uridine.
RNA extraction. RNA was extracted from 3 independent cell cultures of DN-POLG cells at days 0, 3, 6 and 9 using RNAeasy Mini and QIAshredder kits [QIAGEN] and was used for both RNA-seq and microarrays; RNA from AOX/NDI1 cells was obtained at days 0 and 9 and used for microarrays only.  In all cases, samples from 3 independent experiments were collected (N=3 per time point per cell model).
Gene expression experiments by RNAseq in DN-POLG cells. RNA from DN-POLG cells at days 0, 3, 6 and 9 (N=3 each timepoint) was poly-A-selected and sequenced with a HiSeq 2000 system [Illumina]. Following 3’ adapter trimming and base-calling filtering (phred score>20) we obtained ~100 million 126-nt paired-end reads per individual sample (7-8 flow cell lanes/sample), which were aligned to the hg19 human reference genome [Genome Reference Consortium GRCh37 from February 2009] (32) with TopHat-Fusion function (33). Composite per kilobase per million reads (RPKM) counts within genomic coordinates of 20,304 non-haplotype HGNC-annotated genes were used to calculate gene expression differences based on log2-transformed fold-change (log2FC) relative to average gene RPKM at Day 0 (adj. Benjamini-Hochberg p<0.05).
grand mean [where (?SSR)2=(SSRlog2FC)/(N-1)] compared to 5% of the 6?-spread in measurement error about the mean log2FC at each time point in the gene [where (?log2FC)2=(SSElog2FC)/(N-1)].
Gene expression experiments by microarray technology and data analyses. For microarrays analysis of gene expression, the Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 GeneChip® arrays were used. Samples were prepared as per manufacturer’s instructions. Arrays were scanned in an Affymetrix Scanner 3000 and data was obtained using the GeneChip® Command Console and Expression Console Software (AGCC; Version 3.2 and Expression Console; Version 1.2) using the MAS5 algorithm to generate CHP-extension files. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to identify statistical differences between means of groups at ?<0.05 level among HG-U133 Plus 2.0 probe sets unambiguously mapped to UCSC known gene transcripts (see Supplementary Experimental Procedures for more details).
Comparison of RNA-seq and Microarray Gene Expression Data.  To assess the concordance between the DEGs from the RNA-seq platform and those from the Affymetrix microarrays, we conducted comparisons at the transcript sequence-level. First, we obtained all 604,258 probe sequences (corresponding to 54,675 unique probe sets) from the Affymetrix human U133 Plus 2.0 GeneChip© Array (http://www.affymetrix.com). Then we obtained the 82,960 human (hg19) unique known gene transcripts sequences from the University of California Santa Cruz (UCSC) Genome Browser (32). For each probe, a local sequence alignment was performed with version 34 of the BLAST-like Local Alignment Tool (BLAT) (34, 35) against the unique human (hg19) transcripts sequence database allowing for a single-mismatch. To map the Affymetrix probe sets to a UCSC known human gene transcript, we implemented a high, medium, or low stringency criteria that a minimum of 8, 6, or 4 probes in a probe set, respectively, must align unambiguously to a transcript. Concordance between the DEGs from RNA-seq and Microarray based on the unambiguously mapped probe sets to UCSC known gene transcripts was computed as the ratio (percentage) between the number of overlapping DEGs relative to the number of DEGs from a single platform alone.
Curation of cross-platform DEGs by pathway-based concordance filtering.  Pathway enrichment analysis via the Ingenuity platform was performed for DEGs in DN-POLG cells detected by either RNA-seq or microarrays separately, and with additional support from differentially enriched metabolite data, at each time point.  Significantly enriched metabolic pathways based on one platform’s detected DEGs [?log(p)>1.3] that were statistically represented based on detected DEGs by the other platform [?log(p)>0] were deemed concordantly enriched, and their DEGs agglomerated into a final list of 1,282 ‘focus genes’. 
Determination of differential H3K9ac enrichment patterns.  To determine clades of differential H3K9ac enrichment, differences at reference H3K9ac-enriched loci between log-transformed H3K9ac/input RPKM ratios for days 3, 6 and 9 v. day 0 in DN-POLG cells were analyzed by EdgeR (42).  H3K9ac-enriched loci with adjusted p<0.05 scores were used to define “seed” patterns of time-dependent H3K9ac enrichment via per-locus normalized correlation-based unsupervised clustering.  Finally, the remaining H3K9ac enrichment loci were assigned based on correlation-driven assignment (R?0.9) to one or more “seed” patterns, annotated to the closest gene within a 2-kb range, and defined as “uniquely clustered peaks” if associated exclusively to a single “seed” pattern; we refer to a gene annotated in multiple peaks as a “uniquely clustered gene” when such peaks are all uniquely clustered and classified assigned to the same “seed”.  To perform these analysis, we used the SeqMonk analytical platform, version 37.1 (Andrews, S. SeqMonk, 2007: <http://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk>).  
Enymatic activities. Cells were lysed and the nuclear fraction enriched using differential centrifugation. HAT activity was gauged using 1 ?g of nuclear lysates and a fluorometric assay (Biovision) following manufacturer instructions. HDAC activity was assayed using 1 ?g of nuclear lysates and a fluorometric kit available from Enzo Life Sciences following manufacturer’s instructions. DNMT activity was assayed using radioactive filter-binding assay as previously described (43). Briefly, we monitored the incorporation of tritiated [3H] methyl groups into a poly-IC duplex DNA oligonucleotide using cell lysates from rho+ or rho0 cells. The unreacted [methyl-3H] was separated from the radiolabeled DNA using filter-binding. The 3H–CH3-containing duplex DNA was then quantified by liquid scintillation. Data were normalized to protein content. Acetyl-CoA manipulations using HC, PHX, DCA, ?KG and BTC were performed as previously described (17); the pH of final drug concentrations was adjusted to 7.0 using NaOH. All assays were performed on at least N=3 independent biological replicates per derivative. For acetyl-CoA measurements, cells were pelleted and resuspended in 3.5% of perchloric acid. Lysates were then sonicated on ice for 30s, flash frozen in liquid nitrogen, thawed on ice and then span at 5000xg at 4ºC for 10 min. Supernatants were then collected, neutralized to pH ~7.2 with 1M KOH and 50 ?L used for the acetyl-CoA assays (Biovision) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Levels of the metabolite were estimated based on standard curves; data were normalized to protein content obtained from parallel cell cultures.
Ingenuity Pathway enrichment analyses.  Pathway enrichment was scored using the Ingenuity® Pathway Analysis package (IPA®) [QIAGEN].  Briefly, symbols and relative abundance of target molecules, i.e. differentially expressed genes and their mean log2FC (HGNC-approved), were uploaded to the IPA® engine for significance testing of pathway representation, transcriptional regulator overlap, and expression-based prediction of transcriptional regulator activity with respect to the Ingenuity® Knowledge Base. In some analyses, DEGs were stratified based on their epigenetic status. Transcriptional regulator overlap was scored based on the rate of overlapping downstream target genes v. random (Fisher’s exact test, ?log(p)>1.3 corresponding to significance at the ?<0.05 level).  Predicted activity of a transcriptional regulator was scored based on a Gaussian-approximated model comparing the proportion of target genes with expression changes concordant with reported effects by activation v. inhibition of the inferred regulator (significance at ). 

Supplementary Materials
Supplementary Figure Legends
Supplementary Figures
Supplementary Tables






 References

1.	N. S. Chandel, Navigating metabolism.  (Cold Spring Harbor Press, 2015), pp. xv, 248 pages.
2.	L. A. Sena, N. S. Chandel, Physiological roles of mitochondrial reactive oxygen species. Molecular cell 48, 158-167 (2012).
3.	M. Picard, D. C. Wallace, Y. Burelle, The rise of mitochondria in medicine. Mitochondrion 30, 105-116 (2016).
4.	R. N. Lightowlers, R. W. Taylor, D. M. Turnbull, Mutations causing mitochondrial disease: What is new and what challenges remain? Science 349, 1494-1499 (2015).
5.	L. B. Sullivan, E. Martinez-Garcia, H. Nguyen, A. R. Mullen, E. Dufour, S. Sudarshan, J. D. Licht, R. J. Deberardinis, N. S. Chandel, The proto-oncometabolite fumarate binds glutathione to amplify ROS-dependent signaling. Molecular cell 51, 236-248 (2013).
6.	W. Xu, H. Yang, Y. Liu, Y. Yang, P. Wang, S. H. Kim, S. Ito, C. Yang, P. Wang, M. T. Xiao, L. X. Liu, W. Q. Jiang, J. Liu, J. Y. Zhang, B. Wang, S. Frye, Y. Zhang, Y. H. Xu, Q. Y. Lei, K. L. Guan, S. M. Zhao, Y. Xiong, Oncometabolite 2-hydroxyglutarate is a competitive inhibitor of alpha-ketoglutarate-dependent dioxygenases. Cancer Cell 19, 17-30 (2011).
7.	M. Picard, J. Zhang, S. Hancock, O. Derbeneva, R. Golhar, P. Golik, S. O'Hearn, S. Levy, P. Potluri, M. Lvova, A. Davila, C. S. Lin, J. C. Perin, E. F. Rappaport, H. Hakonarson, I. A. Trounce, V. Procaccio, D. C. Wallace, Progressive increase in mtDNA 3243A>G heteroplasmy causes abrupt transcriptional reprogramming. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111, E4033-4042 (2014).
8.	J. A. van der Knaap, C. P. Verrijzer, Undercover: gene control by metabolites and metabolic enzymes. Genes & development 30, 2345-2369 (2016).
9.	I. Martinez-Reyes, L. P. Diebold, H. Kong, M. Schieber, H. Huang, C. T. Hensley, M. M. Mehta, T. Wang, J. H. Santos, R. Woychik, E. Dufour, J. N. Spelbrink, S. E. Weinberg, Y. Zhao, R. J. DeBerardinis, N. S. Chandel, TCA Cycle and Mitochondrial Membrane Potential Are Necessary for Diverse Biological Functions. Molecular cell,  (2016).
10.	C. Wang, B. Gong, P. R. Bushel, J. Thierry-Mieg, D. Thierry-Mieg, J. Xu, H. Fang, H. Hong, J. Shen, Z. Su, J. Meehan, X. Li, L. Yang, H. Li, P. P. Labaj, D. P. Kreil, D. Megherbi, S. Gaj, F. Caiment, J. van Delft, J. Kleinjans, A. Scherer, V. Devanarayan, J. Wang, Y. Yang, H. R. Qian, L. J. Lancashire, M. Bessarabova, Y. Nikolsky, C. Furlanello, M. Chierici, D. Albanese, G. Jurman, S. Riccadonna, M. Filosi, R. Visintainer, K. K. Zhang, J. Li, J. H. Hsieh, D. L. Svoboda, J. C. Fuscoe, Y. Deng, L. Shi, R. S. Paules, S. S. Auerbach, W. Tong, The concordance between RNA-seq and microarray data depends on chemical treatment and transcript abundance. Nature biotechnology 32, 926-932 (2014).
11.	M. P. King, G. Attardi, Human cells lacking mtDNA: repopulation with exogenous mitochondria by complementation. Science 246, 500-503 (1989).
12.	X. R. Bao, S. E. Ong, O. Goldberger, J. Peng, R. Sharma, D. A. Thompson, S. B. Vafai, A. G. Cox, E. Marutani, F. Ichinose, W. Goessling, A. Regev, S. A. Carr, C. B. Clish, V. K. Mootha, Mitochondrial dysfunction remodels one-carbon metabolism in human cells. eLife 5,  (2016).
13.	J. Nikkanen, S. Forsstrom, L. Euro, I. Paetau, R. A. Kohnz, L. Wang, D. Chilov, J. Viinamaki, A. Roivainen, P. Marjamaki, H. Liljenback, S. Ahola, J. Buzkova, M. Terzioglu, N. A. Khan, S. Pirnes-Karhu, A. Paetau, T. Lonnqvist, A. Sajantila, P. Isohanni, H. Tyynismaa, D. K. Nomura, B. J. Battersby, V. Velagapudi, C. J. Carroll, A. Suomalainen, Mitochondrial DNA Replication Defects Disturb Cellular dNTP Pools and Remodel One-Carbon Metabolism. Cell metabolism 23, 635-648 (2016).
14.	M. P. King, G. Attardi, Isolation of human cell lines lacking mitochondrial DNA. Methods Enzymol 264, 304-313 (1996).
15.	E. Perales-Clemente, M. P. Bayona-Bafaluy, A. Perez-Martos, A. Barrientos, P. Fernandez-Silva, J. A. Enriquez, Restoration of electron transport without proton pumping in mammalian mitochondria. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105, 18735-18739 (2008).
16.	N. G. Larsson, J. Wang, H. Wilhelmsson, A. Oldfors, P. Rustin, M. Lewandoski, G. S. Barsh, D. A. Clayton, Mitochondrial transcription factor A is necessary for mtDNA maintenance and embryogenesis in mice. Nature genetics 18, 231-236 (1998).
17.	G. Marino, F. Pietrocola, T. Eisenberg, Y. Kong, S. A. Malik, A. Andryushkova, S. Schroeder, T. Pendl, A. Harger, M. Niso-Santano, N. Zamzami, M. Scoazec, S. Durand, D. P. Enot, A. F. Fernandez, I. Martins, O. Kepp, L. Senovilla, C. Bauvy, E. Morselli, E. Vacchelli, M. Bennetzen, C. Magnes, F. Sinner, T. Pieber, C. Lopez-Otin, M. C. Maiuri, P. Codogno, J. S. Andersen, J. A. Hill, F. Madeo, G. Kroemer, Regulation of autophagy by cytosolic acetyl-coenzyme A. Molecular cell 53, 710-725 (2014).
18.	K. E. Wellen, G. Hatzivassiliou, U. M. Sachdeva, T. V. Bui, J. R. Cross, C. B. Thompson, ATP-citrate lyase links cellular metabolism to histone acetylation. Science 324, 1076-1080 (2009).
19.	A. Bird, DNA methylation patterns and epigenetic memory. Genes & development 16, 6-21 (2002).
20.	J. D. Finkelstein, The metabolism of homocysteine: pathways and regulation. European journal of pediatrics 157 Suppl 2, S40-44 (1998).
21.	A. Kode, I. Mosialou, B. C. Silva, S. Joshi, M. Ferron, M. T. Rached, S. Kousteni, FoxO1 protein cooperates with ATF4 protein in osteoblasts to control glucose homeostasis. The Journal of biological chemistry 287, 8757-8768 (2012).
22.	N. Su, M. S. Kilberg, C/EBP homology protein (CHOP) interacts with activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) and negatively regulates the stress-dependent induction of the asparagine synthetase gene. The Journal of biological chemistry 283, 35106-35117 (2008).
23.	C. E. McCullough, R. Marmorstein, Molecular Basis for Histone Acetyltransferase Regulation by Binding Partners, Associated Domains, and Autoacetylation. ACS chemical biology 11, 632-642 (2016).
24.	A. Piunti, A. Shilatifard, Epigenetic balance of gene expression by Polycomb and COMPASS families. Science 352, aad9780 (2016).
25.	E. McDonnell, S. B. Crown, D. B. Fox, B. Kitir, O. R. Ilkayeva, C. A. Olsen, P. A. Grimsrud, M. D. Hirschey, Lipids Reprogram Metabolism to Become a Major Carbon Source for Histone Acetylation. Cell reports 17, 1463-1472 (2016).
26.	A. Drazic, L. M. Myklebust, R. Ree, T. Arnesen, The world of protein acetylation. Biochimica et biophysica acta 1864, 1372-1401 (2016).
27.	S. C. Kim, R. Sprung, Y. Chen, Y. Xu, H. Ball, J. Pei, T. Cheng, Y. Kho, H. Xiao, L. Xiao, N. V. Grishin, M. White, X. J. Yang, Y. Zhao, Substrate and functional diversity of lysine acetylation revealed by a proteomics survey. Molecular cell 23, 607-618 (2006).
28.	D. J. Smiraglia, M. Kulawiec, G. L. Bistulfi, S. G. Gupta, K. K. Singh, A novel role for mitochondria in regulating epigenetic modification in the nucleus. Cancer biology & therapy 7, 1182-1190 (2008).
29.	M. A. Caudill, J. C. Wang, S. Melnyk, I. P. Pogribny, S. Jernigan, M. D. Collins, J. Santos-Guzman, M. E. Swendseid, E. A. Cogger, S. J. James, Intracellular S-adenosylhomocysteine concentrations predict global DNA hypomethylation in tissues of methyl-deficient cystathionine beta-synthase heterozygous mice. The Journal of nutrition 131, 2811-2818 (2001).
30.	S. J. James, S. Melnyk, M. Pogribna, I. P. Pogribny, M. A. Caudill, Elevation in S-adenosylhomocysteine and DNA hypomethylation: potential epigenetic mechanism for homocysteine-related pathology. The Journal of nutrition 132, 2361S-2366S (2002).
31.	R. Yang, C. Qu, Y. Zhou, J. E. Konkel, S. Shi, Y. Liu, C. Chen, S. Liu, D. Liu, Y. Chen, E. Zandi, W. Chen, Y. Zhou, S. Shi, Hydrogen Sulfide Promotes Tet1- and Tet2-Mediated Foxp3 Demethylation to Drive Regulatory T Cell Differentiation and Maintain Immune Homeostasis. Immunity 43, 251-263 (2015).
32.	W. J. Kent, C. W. Sugnet, T. S. Furey, K. M. Roskin, T. H. Pringle, A. M. Zahler, D. Haussler, The human genome browser at UCSC. Genome research 12, 996-1006 (2002).
33.	D. Kim, S. L. Salzberg, TopHat-Fusion: an algorithm for discovery of novel fusion transcripts. Genome biology 12, R72 (2011).
34.	S. F. Altschul, W. Gish, W. Miller, E. W. Myers, D. J. Lipman, Basic local alignment search tool. Journal of molecular biology 215, 403-410 (1990).
35.	W. J. Kent, BLAT--the BLAST-like alignment tool. Genome research 12, 656-664 (2002).
36.	N. Fujita, P. A. Wade, Use of bifunctional cross-linking reagents in mapping genomic distribution of chromatin remodeling complexes. Methods 33, 81-85 (2004).
37.	M. F. Carey, C. L. Peterson, S. T. Smale, Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP). Cold Spring Harbor protocols 2009, pdb prot5279 (2009).
38.	B. Langmead, S. L. Salzberg, Fast gapped-read alignment with Bowtie 2. Nature methods 9, 357-359 (2012).
39.	Q. Qin, S. Mei, Q. Wu, H. Sun, L. Li, L. Taing, S. Chen, F. Li, T. Liu, C. Zang, H. Xu, Y. Chen, C. A. Meyer, Y. Zhang, M. Brown, H. W. Long, X. S. Liu, ChiLin: a comprehensive ChIP-seq and DNase-seq quality control and analysis pipeline. BMC bioinformatics 17, 404 (2016).
40.	Y. Zhang, T. Liu, C. A. Meyer, J. Eeckhoute, D. S. Johnson, B. E. Bernstein, C. Nusbaum, R. M. Myers, M. Brown, W. Li, X. S. Liu, Model-based analysis of ChIP-Seq (MACS). Genome biology 9, R137 (2008).
41.	Q. H. Li, J. B. Brown, H. Y. Huang, P. J. Bickel, Measuring Reproducibility of High-Throughput Experiments. Ann Appl Stat 5, 1752-1779 (2011).
42.	M. D. Robinson, D. J. McCarthy, G. K. Smyth, edgeR: a Bioconductor package for differential expression analysis of digital gene expression data. Bioinformatics 26, 139-140 (2010).
43.	C. Gros, L. Chauvigne, A. Poulet, Y. Menon, F. Ausseil, I. Dufau, P. B. Arimondo, Development of a universal radioactive DNA methyltransferase inhibition test for high-throughput screening and mechanistic studies. Nucleic acids research 41, e185 (2013).
    
Acknowledgements
    We thank the staff at the Core Facilities at NIEHS and NIH (Epigenetics and Genomics) and the critical reading of the manuscript by Drs. Raja Jothi and Paul Wade (NIEHS). This research was supported [in part] by the Intramural Research Program of the NIH, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, grant R35CA197532 (NC) and Fondecyt 11140869 (GR).

Author Contributions
    OAL performed and analyzed genomics and qRT-PCR experiments, and analyzed metabolomics data. IMR and NC participated in experimental design, DG maintained cell cultures and performed HAT assay, TW helped with bioinformatics, TW performed HDAC and metabolite analysis, PB and JL analyzed microarray and cross-platform concordance, GR performed the SNPs analysis, DGS performed the Seahorse experiments, RPW and JHS conceptualized the experiments and wrote the manuscript.

Competing Interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Data accessibility
Genomics data can be accessed at the GEO with the following accession numbers: 

Figure Legends
Figure 1. Loss of electron transport function significantly impacts the transcriptome. (A) Average normalized read counts (reads per kilobase per million – RPKM) of chromosome M (mitochondrial) transcripts obtained by RNA-seq; N=3. (B) Number of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) identified compared to day 0 and the overlap between time points (Venn Diagram).  (C) Increased (red) or decreased (green) expression of DEGs. Each line represents the same DEGs across time. N=6 (RNA-seq N=3; microarrays N=3).  (D) Unsupervised clustering analysis of average DEGs changes was performed for each data point. Mean fold change is depicted; number below the graphs indicate the cluster number. (E) Ingenuity Pathway Analysis was used to identify the pathways that were enriched when analyzing the genes within each cluster (from panel D). (F) Heatmap depicts the effect of AOX/NDI1 expression for the average fold-change identified in genes within each cluster (from panel D). 
Figure 2. Modulation of histone acetylation by mtDNA depletion associates with a large fraction of transcriptome changes. (A) Average enrichment level of H3K9ac peaks over input DNA centered around the transcription start site (TSS) of genes. Red arrow indicates levels for day 9 in both cell lines. N=2 per cell type. (B) Average enrichment of significantly changed H3K9ac peaks is plotted; error bars represent standard error of the mean. (C) Chart depicts the number of genes in changing H3K9ac peaks (left) and the cluster distribution for DEGs. (D) Screen shot of a gene exemplifying the 32 DEGS that follow the pattern of cluster A. Top represents gene structure, the peak on the left falls on the annotated promoter; peak on the right is on the gene body in a non-annotated area. (E) Concordance between gene expression directionality (y-axis) and H3K9ac enrichment levels relative to day 0 (x-axis) are presented. The number of DEGs in each quadrant is also indicated; colors depict quantile distribution. 
Figure 3. AOX/NDI1 ectopic expression restores the change in histone mark at the same locus, overall regulating specific genes. (A) IPA was used for pathway enrichment as a function of cluster representation. (B) Graphical representation of the H3K9ac peak at the TSS of 4 distinct DEGs identified in the DN-POLG cells and the AOX/NDI1 counterparts. MTHFD1 (methylenetetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase 1), PSAT1 (phosphoserine aminotransferase 1), CBS (cystathione beta synthase) and MLYCD (malonyl-CoA decarboxylase). Black bar indicates the gene and the vertical bars within depict the exons. 
Figure 4. Mitochondrial DNA depletion alters HAT activity and histone acetylation through levels of acetyl-CoA. (A) Western blots of different histone H3 acetylation marks. Lane 1 rho+ control, lane 2: rho0; data are representative of at least 3 independent biological replicates. (B) HDAC activity was gauged based on a fluorometric assay using nuclear extracts. N=4. (C) HAT activity was estimated using a fluorescent assay and a standard curve; N=3. Total levels of acetyl-CoA were estimated using deproteinized samples in a fluorescent-based assay and a standard acetyl-CoA curve in non-treated cells (D) or upon medium supplementation with dimethyl ?-ketoglutarate (F) or BTC (I). N=3 biological replicates per experimental condition. HAT activity was estimated using an in vitro assay in control cells or in cells exposed for 4h to dichloroacetate (DCA, panel E), dimethyl ?-ketoglutarate (?-keto, panel G), 1,2,3-benzenetricarboxylate (BTC) or perhexiline (PHX, panel J) or hydroxyl citrate (HC, panel K), N=3 per cell type and experimental condition. Western blots probing different acetylated histone residues upon treatment of the cells with dimethyl ?-ketoglutarate (?-keto, panel H) or HC (panel L). Western images are representative of N= 2 or 3; HC blots were cropped to exclude unrelated lane; the full image can be found in Fig. S5G. 
Figure 5. Mitochondrial dysfunction also affects DNA methylation patterns influencing gene expression. (A) Heatmap represents the percentage methylation change of loci in the DN-POLG or AOX/NDI1 cells; N=3 for each cell type. (B) Number of DEGs that also have a change in methylation (DMG or differentially methylated gene) at each time point. Venn diagram depicts the number shared or unique to each time point. (C) Average methylation change at promoter regions of focus DEGs (as per DN-POLG) identified in same genomic coordinates in the AOX/NDI1 cells was compared to the average change in non-expressed genes genome-wide.  Left bar indicates data obtained close to DEGs (yes) or non-DEG (no; right bar). N= 3,004 for non-DEGs and 119 for DEGs. (D) Concordance between gene expression directionality (y-axis) and change in DNA methylation levels (x-axis) are presented for each time point. The number of DEGs in each quadrant is also indicated; colors depict quantile density. (E) Upper part of the figure depicts the average change in gene expressions for DEGs within each cluster as in Fig. 1C for DN-POLG (grey bars) and AOX/NDI1 (green bars). The number of DMEGs within each cluster is indicated below the graphs. The bottom panel shows the mean change in DNA methylation observed per time point for the DN-POLG (grey dots) or AOX/NDI1 (green dots). Each dot represents the average methylation change for DML at promoters of the same gene. 
Figure 6. Mitochondrial driven-epigenetic remodeling associates with a large fraction of transcriptomic changes. (A)  Venn diagram indicating the percentage of total DEGs (1,282) that have epigenetic changes concomitantly or not. DPMEGs: differential peak- methylated- and expressed -genes, differentially enriched peaks and expressed genes (DPEGs) and differential methylated and expressed genes (DMEGs). (B) Each plot includes information of H3K9ac fold enrichment changes (x-axis), DNA methylation changes (y-axis, in percentage) and differential gene expression (fold-change v. day 0), which is depicted based on the color of the dots; number of genes containing all these marks at each time point is indicated on the top right. Note that 102 DEGs had both marks throughout the course of the experiments but not necessarily at the same time. (C) IPA was performed to identify enriched pathways using DEGs based on their epigenetic marks. 
Figure 7. Specific transcriptional regulators coupled to epigenetic remodeling are predicted to influence transcription upon mitochondrial dysfunction. (A) The average level of H3K9ac change (compared to day 0 close to DEGs was compared to the average change over non-DEGs. Statistical significance was evaluated using one-way ANOVA within each time point. N = 2,259 peaks for focus DEGs and N=20,601 for non-DEGs. (B) Average methylation change at promoter regions of DEGs compared to the average change in non-expressed genes genome-wide.  Left bar indicates data obtained close to DEGs (yes) or non-DEG (no; right bar). N= 16, 228 and 406 for DEGs at days 3, 6 and 9, respectively, while for non-DEGs these numbers were N= 3,737 (day 3), 5,876 (day 6) and 10,099 (day 9). (C) IPA was used to predict upstream regulators based on the presence or absence of epigenetic marks. Significant prediction of activity is defined based on the z-score that predicts whether regulators, as per expression of downstream targets, are active (in orange) or inhibited (in blue).
    
    
    
    1
    
    
    Lozoya Page 39
    
    Mitochondrial regulation of epigenetic remodeling
    
    
